Más allá de la Paz
================

Es muy importante que practiquemos el Dhamma. Si no practicamos, todo nuestro conocimiento es solo superficial, solo la capa externa de él. Es como si tuviesemos una fruta cualquiera pero no la hubiesemos probado todavía. A pesar de tener esa fruta en la mano no sacamos ningún beneficio de ello. Solo por el hecho de comerla sabremos realmente como sabe.

El Buda no elogiaba a los que simplemente creían a los demás, él elogiaba a los que conocían por sí mismos. Igual que con la fruta, si ya la hemos saboreado, no necesitamos preguntarle a nadie si está dulce o amarga. Se terminan los problemas. ¿Cómo es que se terminan? Porque vemos en sintonía con la realidad. El que ha realizado el Dhamma es como el que ha realizado el sabor dulce o amargo de la fruta. Aquí se acaba toda duda.

Cuando hablamos del Dhamma, aunque podemos decir mucho, normalmente pueden resumirse en cuatro cosas. Estas son conocer el sufrimiento, conocer la causa del sufrimiento, conocer el fin del sufrimiento y conocer el camino de práctica que lleva al fin del sufrimiento.

Esto es lo que hay. Todo lo que hemos pasado durante nuestra práctica hasta ahora se puede resumir en estas cuatro cosas. Cuando sabemos estas cuatro cosas nuestros problemas se acaban.

¿De dónde nacen estas cuatro cosas? Nacen justo aquí en el cuerpo y en la mente, no nacen en ningún otro sitio. ¿Entonces por qué son las enseñanzas del Buda tan detalladas y extensas? Para explicar estas cosas de manera más depurada, para ayudarnos a entender.

Cuando Siddhattha Gotama vino al mundo, antes de que percibiese el Dhamma, era una persona normal como nosotros. Cuando conoció lo que tenía que conocer, es decir, la verdad del sufrimiento, la causa, el fin y la camino que lleva al fin del sufrimiento, realizó el Dhamma y se convirtió en un Buddha perfectamente iluminado.

Cuando realizamos el Dhamma, donde quiera que nos sentemos conocemos el Dhamma, donde quiera que estemos escuchamos las enseñanzas del Buda. Cuando entendemos el Dhamma, el Buda está en nuestra mente, el Dhamma está en nuestra mente, y la práctica que lleva a la sabiduría está en nuestra mente.  Teniendo al Buda, el Dhamma y el Saṅgha en nuestra mente significa que sean nuestras acciones buenas o malas, conocemos claramente por nosotros mismos su verdadera naturaleza.

Así es como el Buda descartó las creencias mundanas, el elogio y la crítica.
Cuando la gente lo elogiaba o lo criticaba él lo aceptaba simplemente por lo que era. Ambas son estados mundanos así que no le perturbaban. ¿Por qué no? Porque conocía el sufrimiento. Sabía que si creía en esos elogios o esas críticas le harían sufrir.

Cuando el sufrimiento surge nos perturba, nos incomoda. ¿Cúal es la causa del sufrimiento? Es por no conocer la verdad, la realidad, esta es la causa. Cuando la causa está presente, el sufrimiento surge. Una que ha surgido no sabemos cómo pararlo. Cuanto mas intentamos pararlo, mas nos llega. Decimos 'no me critiques' o 'no me eches la culpa'. Intentar detenerlo es así, el sufrimiento sigue llegando, no se detendrá.

Así que el Buda enseñaba que el camino que lleva al fin del sufrimiento es hacer que el Dhamma surga y sea una realidad en nuestras mentes. Nos convertimos en aquellos que son testigos del Dhamma por sí mismos. Si nos dice que somos buenos no nos perdemos en ello, si dicen que no somos buenos no nos olvidamos de nosotros mismos. De esta forma podemos ser libres. 'Bueno' y 'malo' son solo dhammas mundanos, son solo estados de la mente. Si los seguimos nuestra mente se convierte en el mundo, andamos a tientas en la oscuridad sin saber el camino de salida.

Si es así es que todavía no tenemos dominio sobre nosotros mismos. Intentamos vencer a otros, pero al hacerlo solo nos derrotamos a nosotros mismos, pero si tenemos dominio sobre nosotros mismos tenemos dominio sobre todo -sobre las formaciones mentales, vistas, sonidos, olores, sabores y sensaciones corporales.

Ahora estoy hablando sobre lo externo, son así, pero lo externo se refleja en el interior también. Alguna gente solo conoce lo externo, no conocen lo interno. Como cuando dicen 'ver el cuerpo en el cuerpo'. Haber visto el cuerpo externo no es suficiente, debemos conocer el cuerpo dentro del cuerpo. Luego, habiendo investigado la mente, deberíamos conocer la mente dentro de la mente.

¿Por qué deberíamos investigar el cuerpo? ¿Qué es el 'cuerpo en el cuerpo'?
Cuando decimos conocer la mente, ¿qué es esta 'mente'? Si no conocemos la mente no conocemos las cosas dentro de la mente. Así es alguien que no conoce el sufrimiento, que no conoce la causa, que no conoce el fin y que no conoce el camino que lleva al fin del sufrimiento. Lo que debería ayudar a extinguir el sufrimiento no ayuda, porque nos distraemos con las cosas que lo intensifican. ¡Es como si nos pica la cabeza y nos rascamos la pierna! Si lo que nos pica es la cabeza está claro que no vamos a conseguir aliviarlo mucho. Te la misma manera, cuando el sufrimiento surge no sabemos como manejarlo, no sabemos la práctica que lleva al fin del sufrimiento.

Por ejemplo, tomenos el cuerpo, este cuerpo que cada uno de nosotros a traído a este encuentro. Si solo vemos la forma del cuerpo no hay manera de que escapemos del sufrimiento. ¿Por qué no? Porque todavía no vemos el interior del cuerpo, solo vemos el exterior. Solo lo vemos como algo bonito, algo solido, real. El Budha dijo que ver solo esto no es suficiente. Vemos el exterior con nuestros ojos, un niño puede ver, los animales pueden ver, no es difícil. El exterior del cuerpo se ve fácilmente, pero habiéndolo visto, nos aferramos a él, no conocemos la realidad sobre él. Habiéndolo visto lo agarramos ¡y nos muerde!

Así que deberíamos investigar el cuerpo dentro del cuerpo. Lo que sea que haya en el cuerpo, adelante, obsérvalo. Si solo vemos el exterior no está claro. Vemos pelo, uñas y demás y solo son cosas bonitas que nos seducen. ASí que el Buda enseñó a ver el interior del cuerpo, a ver el cuerpo dentro del cuerpo. ¿Qué hay en el cuerpo? ¡Mira de cerca el interior!
Encontraremos muchas sorpresas dentro, porque a pesar de que están en nuestro interior, nunca las hemos visto. Allá donde vamos las llevamos con nosotros, sentados en el coche las llevamos con nosotros ¡pero todavía no las conocemos para nada!

It’s as if we visit some relatives at their house and they give us a
present. We take it and put it in our bag and then leave without opening
it to see what is inside. When at last we open it – it’s full of
poisonous snakes! Our body is like this. If we just see the shell we say
it’s fine and beautiful. We forget ourselves. We forget impermanence,
suffering and not-self. If we look within this body, it’s really
repulsive.

If we look according to reality, without trying to sugar things over,
we’ll see that it’s really pitiful and wearisome. Dispassion will arise.
This feeling of ‘disinterest’ is not that we feel aversion for the world
or anything; it’s simply our mind clearing up, our mind letting go. We
see things as not substantial or dependable, but that all things are
naturally established just as they are. However we want them to be, they
just go their own way regardless. Whether we laugh or cry, they simply
are the way they are. Things which are unstable are unstable; things
which are not beautiful are not beautiful.

So the Buddha said that when we experience sights, sounds, tastes,
smells, bodily feelings or mental states, we should release them. When
the ear hears sounds, let them go. When the nose smells an odour, let it
go, just leave it at the nose! When bodily feelings arise, let go of the
like or dislike that follow, let them go back to their birth-place. The
same for mental states. All these things, just let them go their way.
This is knowing. Whether it’s happiness or unhappiness, it’s all the
same. This is called meditation.

Meditation means to make the mind peaceful in order to let wisdom arise.
This requires that we practise with body and mind in order to see and
know the sense impressions of form, sound, taste, smell, touch and
mental formations. To put it briefly, it’s just a matter of happiness
and unhappiness. Happiness is pleasant feeling in the mind, unhappiness
is just unpleasant feeling. The Buddha taught to separate this happiness
and unhappiness from the mind. The mind is that which knows. Feeling[^1]
is the characteristic of happiness or unhappiness, like or dislike. When
the mind indulges in these things we say that it clings to or takes that
happiness and unhappiness to be worthy of holding. That clinging is an
action of mind; that happiness or unhappiness is feeling.

When we say the Buddha told us to separate the mind from the feeling, he
didn’t literally mean to throw them to different places. He meant that
the mind must know happiness and know unhappiness. When sitting in
samādhi, for example, and peace fills the mind, happiness comes but it
doesn’t reach us, unhappiness comes but doesn’t reach us. This is how
one separates the feeling from the mind. We can compare it to oil and
water in a bottle. They don’t combine. Even if you try to mix them, the
oil remains oil and the water remains water, because they are of
different density.

The natural state of the mind is neither happiness nor unhappiness. When
feeling enters the mind then happiness or unhappiness is born. If we
have mindfulness then we know pleasant feeling as pleasant feeling. The
mind which knows will not pick it up. Happiness is there but it’s
‘outside’ the mind, not buried within the mind. The mind simply knows it
clearly.

If we separate unhappiness from the mind, does that mean there is no
suffering, that we don’t experience it? Yes, we experience it, but we
know mind as mind, feeling as feeling. We don’t cling to that feeling or
carry it around. The Buddha separated these things through knowledge.
Did he have suffering? He knew the state of suffering but he didn’t
cling to it; so we say that he cut suffering off. And there was
happiness too, but he knew that happiness; if it’s not known, it’s like
a poison. He didn’t hold it to be himself. Happiness was there through
knowledge, but it didn’t exist in his mind. Thus we say that he
separated happiness and unhappiness from his mind.

When we say that the Buddha and the Enlightened Ones killed defilements,
it’s not that they really killed them. If they had killed all
defilements then we probably wouldn’t have any! They didn’t kill
defilements; when they knew them for what they are, they let them go.
Someone who’s stupid will grab them, but the Enlightened Ones knew the
defilements in their own minds as a poison, so they swept them out. They
swept out the things which caused them to suffer, they didn’t kill them.
One who doesn’t know this will see some things, such as happiness, as
good, and then grab them, but the Buddha just knew them and simply
brushed them away.

But when feeling arises for us we indulge in it; that is, the mind
carries that happiness and unhappiness around. In fact they are two
different things. The activities of mind, pleasant feeling, unpleasant
feeling and so on, are mental impressions, they are the world. If the
mind knows this it can equally do work involving happiness or
unhappiness. ¿Por qué? Because it knows the truth of these things. Someone
who doesn’t know them sees them as having different value, but one who
knows sees them as equal. If you cling to happiness it will be the
birthplace of unhappiness later on, because happiness is unstable, it
changes all the time. When happiness disappears, unhappiness arises.

The Buddha knew that because both happiness and unhappiness are
unsatisfactory, they have the same value. When happiness arose he let it
go. He had right practice, seeing that both these things have equal
values and drawbacks. They come under the Law of Dhamma, that is, they
are unstable and unsatisfactory. Once born, they die. When he saw this,
right view arose, the right way of practice became clear. No matter what
sort of feeling or thinking arose in his mind, he knew it as simply the
continuous play of happiness and unhappiness. He didn’t cling to them.

When the Buddha was newly enlightened he gave a sermon about indulgence
in pleasure and indulgence in pain. ‘Monks! Indulgence in pleasure is
the loose way, indulgence in pain is the tense way.’ These were the two
things that disturbed his practice until the day he was enlightened,
because at first he didn’t let go of them. When he knew them, he let
them go, and so was able to give his first sermon.

So we say that a meditator should not walk the way of happiness or
unhappiness, rather he should know them. Knowing the truth of suffering,
he will know the cause of suffering, the end of suffering and the way
leading to the end of suffering. And the way out of suffering is
meditation itself. To put it simply, we must be mindful.

Mindfulness is knowing, or presence of mind. Right now what are we
thinking, what are we doing? What do we have with us right now? We
observe like this, we are aware of how we are living. Practising like
this, wisdom can arise. We consider and investigate at all times, in all
postures. When a mental impression arises that we like we know it as
such, we don’t hold it to be anything substantial. It’s just happiness.
When unhappiness arises we know that it’s indulgence in pain, it’s not
the path of a meditator.

This is what we call separating the mind from the feeling. If we are
clever we don’t attach, we leave things be. We become the ‘one who
knows’. The mind and feeling are just like oil and water; they are in
the same bottle but they don’t mix. Even if we are sick or in pain, we
still know the feeling as feeling, the mind as mind. We know the painful
or comfortable states but we don’t identify with them. We stay only with
peace: the peace beyond both comfort and pain.

You should understand it like this, because if there is no permanent
self then there is no refuge. You must live like this, that is, without
happiness and without unhappiness. You stay only with the knowing, you
don’t carry things around.

As long as we are still unenlightened all this may sound strange but it
doesn’t matter, we just set our goal in this direction. The mind is the
mind. It meets happiness and unhappiness and we see them as merely that,
there’s nothing more to it. They are divided, not mixed. If they are all
mixed up then we don’t know them. It’s like living in a house; the house
and its occupant are related, but separate. If there is danger in our
house we are distressed because we must protect it, but if the house
catches fire we get out of it. If painful feeling arises we get out of
it, just like that house. When it’s full of fire and we know it, we come
running out of it. They are separate things; the house is one thing, the
occupant is another.

We say that we separate mind and feeling in this way but in fact they
are by nature already separate. Our realization is simply to know this
natural separateness according to reality. When we say they are not
separated it’s because we’re clinging to them through ignorance of the
truth.

So the Buddha told us to meditate. This practice of meditation is very
important. Merely to know with the intellect is not enough. The
knowledge which arises from practice with a peaceful mind and the
knowledge which comes from study are really far apart. The knowledge
which comes from study is not real knowledge of our mind. The mind tries
to hold onto and keep this knowledge. Why do we try to keep it? Just to
lose it! And then when it’s lost we cry.

If we really know, then there’s letting go, leaving things be. We know
how things are and don’t forget ourselves. If it happens that we are
sick we don’t get lost in that. Some people think, ‘This year I was sick
the whole time, I couldn’t meditate at all.’ These are the words of a
really foolish person. Someone who’s sick or dying should really be
diligent in his practice. One may say he doesn’t have time to meditate.
He’s sick, he’s suffering, he doesn’t trust his body, and so he feels
that he can’t meditate. If we think like this then things are difficult.
The Buddha didn’t teach like that. He said that right here is the place
to meditate. When we’re sick or almost dying that’s when we can really
know and see reality.

Other people say they don’t have the chance to meditate because they’re
too busy. Sometimes schoolteachers come to see me. They say they have
many responsibilities so there’s no time to meditate. I ask them, ‘When
you’re teaching do you have time to breathe?’ They answer, ‘Yes.’ ‘So
how can you have time to breathe if the work is so hectic and confusing?
Here you are far from Dhamma.’

Actually this practice is just about the mind and its feelings. It’s not
something that you have to run after or struggle for. Breathing
continues while working. Nature takes care of the natural processes –
all we have to do is try to be aware. Just to keep trying, going inwards
to see clearly. Meditation is like this.

If we have that presence of mind then whatever work we do will be the
very tool which enables us to know right and wrong continually. There’s
plenty of time to meditate; we just don’t fully understand the practice,
that’s all. While sleeping we breathe, while eating we breathe, don’t
we? Why don’t we have time to meditate? Wherever we are we breathe. If
we think like this then our life has as much value as our breath;
wherever we are we have time.

All kinds of thinking are mental conditions, not conditions of body, so
we need to simply have presence of mind. Then we will know right and
wrong at all times. Standing, walking, sitting and lying, there’s plenty
of time. We just don’t know how to use it properly. Please consider
this.

We can not run away from feeling, we must know it. Feeling is just
feeling, happiness is just happiness, unhappiness is just unhappiness.
They are simply that. So why should we cling to them? If the mind is
clever, simply hearing this is enough to enable us to separate feeling
from the mind.

If we investigate like this continuously the mind will find release, but
it’s not escaping through ignorance. The mind lets go, but it knows. It
doesn’t let go through stupidity or because it doesn’t want things to be
the way they are. It lets go because it knows according to the truth.
This is seeing nature, the reality that’s all around us.

When we know this we are someone who’s skilled with the mind, we are
skilled with mental impressions. When we are skilled with mental
impressions we are skilled with the world. This is to be a ‘knower of
the world’. The Buddha was someone who clearly knew the world with all
its difficulty. He knew the troublesome, and that which was not
troublesome was right there. This world is so confusing; how is it that
the Buddha was able to know it? Here we should understand that the
Dhamma taught by the Buddha is not beyond our ability. In all postures
we should have presence of mind and self awareness – and when it’s time
to sit in meditation we do that.

We sit in meditation to establish peacefulness and cultivate mental
energy. We don’t do it in order to play around at anything special.
Insight meditation is sitting in samādhi itself. At some places they
say, ‘Now we are going to sit in samādhi, after that we’ll do insight
meditation.’ Don’t divide them like this! Tranquillity is the base which
gives rise to wisdom; wisdom is the fruit of tranquillity. To say that
now we are going to do calm meditation, later we’ll do insight – you
can’t do that! You can only divide them in speech. Just like a knife,
the blade is on one side, the back of the blade on the other. You can’t
divide them. If you pick up one side you get both sides. Tranquillity
gives rise to wisdom like this.

Morality is the father and mother of Dhamma. In the beginning we must
have morality. Morality is peace. This means that one does no
wrongdoings in body or speech. When we don’t do wrong then we don’t get
agitated; when we don’t become agitated then peace and collectedness
arise within the mind.

So we say that morality, concentration and wisdom are the path on which
all the Noble Ones have walked to enlightenment. They are all one.
Morality is concentration, concentration is morality. Concentration is
wisdom, wisdom is concentration. It’s like a mango. When it’s a flower
we call it a flower. When it becomes a fruit we call it a mango. When it
ripens we call it a ripe mango. It’s all one mango but it continually
changes. The big mango grows from the small mango, the small mango
becomes a big one. You can call them different fruits or all one fruit.
Morality, concentration and wisdom are related like this. In the end
it’s all the path that leads to enlightenment.

The mango, from the moment it first appears as a flower, simply grows to
ripeness. This is enough; we should see it like this. Whatever others
call it, it doesn’t matter. Once it’s born it grows to old age, and then
where? We should contemplate this.

Some people don’t want to be old. When they get old they become
depressed. These people shouldn’t eat ripe mangoes! Why do we want the
mangoes to be ripe? If they’re not ripe in time, we ripen them
artificially, don’t we? But when we become old we are filled with
regret. Some people cry; they’re afraid to get old or die. If it’s like
this then they shouldn’t eat ripe mangoes – better to eat just the
flowers! If we can see this then we can see the Dhamma. Everything
clears up, we are at peace. Just determine to practise like that.

Today the Chief Privy Councillor and his party have come together to
hear the Dhamma. You should take what I’ve said and contemplate it. If
anything is not right, please excuse me. But for you to know whether
it’s right or wrong depends on your practising and seeing for
yourselves. Whatever is wrong, throw it out. If it’s right then take it
and use it. But actually we practise in order to let go of both right
and wrong. In the end we just throw everything out. If it’s right, throw
it out; wrong, throw it out! Usually if it’s right we cling to
rightness, if it’s wrong we hold it to be wrong, and then arguments
follow. But the Dhamma is the place where there’s nothing – nothing at
all.

[^1]: Feeling is a translation of the Pāli word *vedanā*, and should be
    understood in the sense Ajahn Chah herein describes it: as the
    mental states of pleasure and pain.
